# Code for "Larval Competition for Space can Induce Allochronic Divergence in the Marine Midge, Clunio marinus" 
doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.16.676472

`Manuscript_Figures.ipynb` is a jupyter notebook containing all of the code to generate the figures. It can be run using jupyter notebooks, or the code can be copied into a python file to be run as a stand-alone script. The code for generating the graphs in figure 1 can be found within this notebook. The notebook also contains the class used for the ecology model simulations (i.e. without exual reproduction, recombinations, or a genetic basis). Individual runs used for figures 2 and 3 were generated by using this class within the notebook to run the simulations with the following commands:
```
sim = ecology_model(sd = 0.25, Cw = 0.1, K = 100, mu = 0.18, N0 = 10, X0 = 15, Y0 = 0, gens = 500)
res, res_y = sim.simulate(return_array = True, return_Y = True, return_N = False)
```
`Sd` corresponds to $\sigma_{dispersal}$, `Cw` is $C_w$, `K` is the carrying capacity, `mu` is the mutation rate, `N0` is the initial population size, `X0` is the initial phenotype of the population, `Y0` is the initial depth of the population, and `gens` is how many generations the simulation will run. `sim.simulate()` will return the number of peaks in the phenotypic distribution at the end of the simulation by default. If `return_array = True`, then it will return the distribution of phenotypes. If `return_array = True` and `return_Y = True`, then it will return both the distrbution of phenotypes and the distribution of individuals over depth. Finally, `return_N = True` returns the population size over the course of the simulation.


#############################################################

!! All `.sbatch` files will have to be modified for use on other computing clusters !! 

#############################################################

`Ecology_model/` subfolders contain the code used to generate figures 3 and S1. These include Python and accomanying Bash scripts which call the Python scripts on a computing cluster using Slurm as a workload manager. 
 - `Fig_3/`
 	- `run_optimized_eco_model.py` executes the simulations for the parameter sweep (figure 3).
 	- `paramSweep.sbatch` runs `run_optimized_eco_model.py` 1000 times, while monitoring how many jobs are running simultaneously on the cluster. It outputs files labelled as `{output directory}/rep{replicate}.npy`. Results are output into the `CwSd_paramSweep/` folder. Generating the data for figure 3 can be done by executing `sbatch paramSweep.sbatch` within the `Ecology_model/Fig_3/` directory.
 - `Sup_fig_1/`
	 - `make-pip.py` runs a modified simulation with only a single, pre-specified mutation event in order to calculate pairwise invasibility of two phenotypes. 
	 - `getPIPs.sbatch` runs `make-pip.py` 1000 times for all phenotypes and for three parameter combinations of $C_w$ and $\sigma_{dispersal}$ to generate the data for supplemental figure 1. Output files are labelled `{output directory}/Cw{value}-sd{value}_rep{replicate}.npy`. Results are output into the `pips/` folder. Generating the data for supplemental figure 1 can then be done by executing `sbatch getPIPs.sbatch` within the `Ecology_model/Sup_fig_1/` directory.

#############################################################

`Genetic_model/` subfolders contain the code to simulate the model with sexual reproduction, recombination, and an explicit genetic basis. These folders contain SLiM, Python, and Bash scripts. The SLiM scripts contain the code to run the simulations in SLiM. These SLiM scripts are called by the python scripts, which specify which parameters are to be used for each simulation and receive/parse the output from SLiM. Lastly, the Bash scripts schedule and manage running the simulations on the computing cluster. SLiM simulations are carried out within a conda environment. This environment can be created by executing `conda env create --name slim --file=SLiM_conda.yml` within the main directory.
 - `Fig_4/`
    - `panel_A/`
		- `reduced_model.slim` contains the SLiM script that executes a single simulation, with parameters specified on the command line.
    	- `CwSd_ParamSweep.py` calls `reduced_model.slim` to run a parameter sweep over $C_w$ and $\sigma_{dispersal}$.
    	- `CwSd_paramSweep.sbatch` launches `CwSd_ParamSweep.py` within slurm sbatch jobs 1000 times, while monitoring how many jobs are running on the cluster. Results will be output into the `CwSd_paramSweep` directory. Generating the data for figure 4a thus requires executing `sbatch CwSd_paramSweep.sbatch` within the `Genetic_model/Fig_4/panel_A/` directory.
    - `panel_B/`
       - `reduced_model_outputPhenos.slim` contains the SLiM script to generate the individual runs in figure 4b. Data can be generated by executing the following code within the `Genetic_model/Fig_4/panel_B/` directory. Results will be output to the `CwSd_paramSweep_examples/` directory.
         ```
         conda activate slim
         slim -d "params='_Cw0.025_Sd0.075'" -d comp_sd=0.025 -d larval_dispersal=0.075 reduced_model_outputPhenos.slim
         slim -d "params='_Cw0.1_Sd0.25'" -d comp_sd=0.1 -d larval_dispersal=0.25 reduced_model_outputPhenos.slim
         slim -d "params='_Cw0.25_Sd0.9'" -d comp_sd=0.25 -d larval_dispersal=0.9 reduced_model_outputPhenos.slim
         ```
 - `Fig_5/`
    - `reduced_model_OutputsFreqs.slim` contains the SLiM script that runs the simulation, outputting allele frequencies at the end of the simulation instead of phenotypes.
    - `Gen_ParamSweep.py` calls `reduced_model_OutputsFreqs.slim` to run a parameter sweep over the genetic parameters $\sigma_{effecting}$, $P_{effecting}$, and $\sigma_{emergence}$, and collects the simulation results.
    - `Gen_paramSweep.sbatch` then launches `Gen_ParamSweep.py` 1000 times within slurm jobs, monitoring how many jobs are running at any one time. Results will be output to the `Gen_paramSweep` directory. Generating the data for figure 5 can be done by exectuing `sbatch Gen_paramSweep.sbatch` within the `Genetic_model/Fig_5/` directory.
 - `Sup_fig_2/`
    - `simulate_vcfs.slim` is a slim script that exectutes a single simluation run, and outputs .vcf files of alleles every 200 generations starting at generation 100. Vcfs will be output to the `vcfs` directory. Running the script can be done by executing the following code within the `Genetic_model/Sup_fig_2/` directory to generate the three simulation runs in supplemental figure 2.
      ```
      conda activate slim
      slim -d "params='_Cw0.025_Sd0.075'" -d comp_sd=0.025 -d larval_dispersal=0.075 simulate_vcfs.slim
      slim -d "params='_Cw0.1_Sd0.25'" -d comp_sd=0.1 -d larval_dispersal=0.25 simulate_vcfs.slim
      slim -d "params='_Cw0.25_Sd0.9'" -d comp_sd=0.25 -d larval_dispersal=0.9 simulate_vcfs.slim
      ```
 - `Sup_fig_3/`
    - `getSplit_model.slim` runs the simulation, stopping when the population diverges. It then outputs the generation number and distribution of phenotypes for the population for the generation before divergence was detected.
    - `initial_states.py` calls `getSplit_model.slim` 10000 times for the same parameter values, collecting the results and outputting them to the `inital_states/` directory.
    - `initial_states.sbatch` launches `initial_states.py` once for each initial phenotype as sbatch jobs. Generating the divergence phenotype data for supplemental figure 3 can be done by executing `sbatch initial_states.sbatch` within the `Genetic_model/Sup_fig_3/` directory.
    - `reduced_model.slim` runs a single simulation with a given set of parameters and outputs the distribution of phenotypes.
    - `initial2final_states.py` calls `reduced_model.slim` 10000 times, collecting the results and outputting them to the `initial2final_stats/` directory.
    - `initial2final_states.sbatch` launches `initial2final_states.py` for each initial phenotype as sbatch jobs. Generating the final phenotype data for supplemental figure 3 can be done by executing `sbatch initial2final_states.sbatch` within the `Genetic_model/Sup_fig_3/` directory.
 - `Sup_fig_4/`
    - `reduced_model_flat.slim`, `reduced_model_linear.slim`, `reduced_model_unimodal.slim`, and `reduced_model_bimodal.slim` are all SLiM scripts that run a single simulation, with different environmental fitness functions $F_e$.
    - `CwSd_ParamSweep_flat.py`, `CwSd_ParamSweep_linear.py`, `CwSd_ParamSweep_unimodal.py`, and `CwSd_ParamSweep_bimodal.py` call their respective SLiM scripts for run a parameter sweep over $C_w$ and $\sigma_{dispersal}$. Results are output to the `flat/`, `linear/`, `unimodal/`, and `bimodal/` directories, respectively.
    - `CwSd_paramSweep.sbatch` launches each python script 1000 times, monitoring how many jobs are running simultaneously. Generating the data for supplemental figure 4 can be done by executing `sbatch CwSd_paramSweep.sbatch` within the `Genetic_model/Sup_fig_4/` directory.
  





 
